# January 2020 :snowflake:

[toc]

---

## Due Thu, Jan 16, 2020 

### 11:58pm

* [x] 1. **Prep Work Reading**: Read Chapters 1, 2, and 3 of the *[Introduction to Professional Web Development in JavaScript](https://education.launchcode.org/intro-to-professional-web-dev/index.html)* textbook
* [x] 2. **Prep Work Quiz** (-/11pts)
* [x] 3. **Demographic Form** (-/1pts)

## Due Thu, Jan 23, 2020 

### 9:00am

> :warning: **IMPORTANT!** [Repl.it classroom link!](https://repl.it/student/classrooms/167827?lite=true)

- [x] a. Class 1 Reading: Chapter 4: Data and Variables
- [x] b. Class 1 Concept Checks: Data and Variables
- [x] c. Class 1: Join repl.it Classroom
- [x] d. Class 1 Exercises: Chapter 4: Data and Variables :runner:

### 8:30pm

* [x] LC101 Code of Conduct

  > :warning: **CAUTION: Social Justice Drama!** 
  > While a Code of Conduct (CoC) is meant to keep the peace and to set the ground rules for what is acceptable behavior, make sure you mind your manners but also, don't take any guff from people trying to exploit the CoC in a manner that takes advantage the whole "microaggressions" fad that denigrates the needs of people who have real social issues they need help with for some off-the-wall behavior by people who can't handle being *responsible mature adults*. Even this word of warning could be considered problematic. I tried hard not to make it so, but I imagine someone will still be upset about it.
  >
  > Regardless, these are my notes. I'm sharing them, and trying to be ask kind and open as possible. Let's not ruin this class by making a scene.
  >
  > As Ellen DeGeneres says: **"Be kind to one another!"**
  >
  > Avoid drama and watch out for snakes! :snake:

### 11:59pm

* [x] :heavy_check_mark: Class 1 Attendance

* [x] e. Class 1 Studio: Chapter 4: Data and Variables

  :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: What number was that Studio? 

## Due Mon, Jan 27, 2020 

### 9:00am

* [x] a. Class 2 Reading: Conditionals & Debugging
* [x] b. Class 2 Concept Checks
* [x] c. Class 2 Exercises: Chapter 5: Conditionals :runner:
* [x] d. Class 2 Exercises: Chapter 6: Errors and Debugging :runner:

### 11:59pm

* [x] :heavy_check_mark: Class 2 Attendance
* [x] e. Class 2 Studio: Goal Setting & Power Statements :studio_microphone:

## Due Thu, Jan 30, 2020

### 9:00am

* [x] a. Class 3. Reading Strings & Arrays
* [x] b. Class 3. Concept Checks
* [x] c. Class 3. Exercises: Strings & Arrays :runner:

### 11:59pm

* [x] :heavy_check_mark: Class 3 Attendance
* [x] d. Class 3 Studio: Strings & Arrays :studio_microphone:



---

#Syllabus