# 8. Arrays Keep Things in Order

[toc]

---

## 8.1. Arrays Are Like Strings

Arrays are similar to strings, but are more general collection types. Like strings, **arrays** are a sequence of values that can be access via an ordered index. Unlike strings, arrays can store data of any type including other arrays.

The figure below demonstrates an array of named languages. The array contains four strings, each of those values has an index position.
$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{languages} & \rightarrow &
\begin{array}{|c|c|}
\hline
0 & \text{"Python"} \\
\hline
1 & \text{"C#"} \\
\hline
2 & \text{"Java"} \\
\hline
3 & \text{"JavaScript"} \\
\hline
\end{array}
\end{aligned}
$$

### 8.1.1. Declaring an Array

Programmers have multiple ways to declare a new array. **Array literal** notation (`[]`) is the most simple. Anything enclosed in the square brackests will be *items* in the array. Each item should be separated by a comma (`,`). If there are no items inside the brackets, then the array is considered empty.

```js
let emptyArray = [];

let languages = ["Python","C#","Java","JavaScript"];
```

Arrays can also be declared on multiple lines.

```js
let languages = [
    "Python",
    "C#",
    "Java",
    "JavaScript"
];
```

### 8.1.2. Array Length

To find the length of an aray, use the **`length`** property, just like with strings. JavaScript arry length is NOT fixed, meaning you can add or remove items dynamically.

```js
let emptyArray = [];
console.log(emptyArray.length);		// 0

let languages = ["Python","C#","Java","JavaScript"];
console.log(languages.length);		// 4
```

> :information_source: **NOTE**: In other languages, such as Java or C#, arrays are of static length requiring the length of an array to be declared upon creation. In JavaScript this is optional. Each cell will be filled with an `undefined` value until one is chosen.
>
> ```js
> var four = new Array(4);	// [undefined, undefined, undefined, undefined];
> four.fill(0);				// [0,0,0,0]
> four.fill("Bob");			// ["Bob","Bob","Bob","Bob"]
> ```

### 8.1.3. Varying Data Types

JavaScript arrays can hod a mixture of values of any type.

```js
let grabBag = ["A String",true, 99, 105.7];
```

> :information_source: **NOTE**: It's rare that you would store data of multiple tyes in the same array, beacause grouped data is usually the same data type. In other languages, like Java or C#, all items in the array have to be of the same type.

### 8.1.4. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: What is the lenght of the two arrays? (Hint: look closely at the quotes in the classes array).
>
> ```js
> let classes = ["science, computer, art"];
> 
> let teachers = ["Jones", "Willoughby", "Rhodes"];
> ```
>
> How can you change the `classes` array declaration to have the same number of items as `the teachers` array?
>
> :exclamation:**Answer**:
>
> 1. One and three. The first one is not separated each comma.
> 2.  Insert quotes at the  commas.

## 8.2. Working With Arrays

### 8.2.1. Bracket Notation and Index

As previously discussed, arrays are an orderd collection where each item can be access via index. Similar to strings, an **index** in an array is the number order given to items. Individual items can be accessed using bracket notation. (`array[index]`). Indexes are zero-based going from `0` to `array.length-1`.

```js
let languages = [
    "Python",		// index 0
    "C#",			// index 1
    "Java",			// index 2
    "JavaScript"	// index 3
];
console.log(languages[0]);	// Python
console.log(languages[3]);	// JavaScript

// What will happen when index 4 is requested?
console.log(languages[4]);	// undefined
```

Notice that `undefined` was printed out when index 4 was referenced. `undefined` is returned when you request an index that the array does not contain.

> :information_source: **NOTE**: **`undefined`** is a special value in JavaScript that means no value has been assigned. We will discuss `undefined` in this class more later.

> **Example**: `undefined` will be returned for any index that is outside of the array's index range.
>
> ```js
> let languages = ["Python","C#","Java","JavaScript"];
> console.log(languges[-1]);	// undefined
> console.log(languges[100]);	// undefined
> ```

### 8.2.2. Arrays are Mutable

In programming, *mutability* refers to what happens when you attempt to change a value. Remember that ==strings are **immutable**==, meaning that any changes ot a string results in a new string being created. In contrast, ==arrays are **mutable**==, meaning that individual items in an array can be edited without a new array being created.

> **Example**: Update an item in an array using bracket notation and index.
>
> ```js
> let frameworks = ["React", "Angular", "Ember"];
> console.log(frameworks);
> 
> // Set value of index 2 to be "Vue"
> frameworks[2] = "Vue";
> 
> // Notice the value at index 2 is now "Vue"
> console.log(frameworks);
> ```
>
> ```
> [ 'React', 'Angular', 'Ember' ]
> [ 'React', 'Angular', 'Vue' ]
> ```

## 8.3. Array Methods

As with strings, JavaScript provides us with useful **methods** for arrays. These methods will either *alter* an existing array, *return* information about the array, or *create and return* a new array.

### 8.3.1. Common Array Methods

> :information_source: **NOTE**: Much like I said in the previous chapter (namely in section 7.5.1) I'm not going to recreate the table here. There are way more methods than the table in the textbook has listed here. I will list the string methods in another document in my notes repository. In the mean time, take a look at
>
> * [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_array.asp)
> * [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array) :star:

> :nerd_face: **Actually...** Also, they got their table wrong. `.split` is not part of the `Array` class. It's part of the `String` class and it suppost to be the complement of `Array`'s `.join` method.

### 8.3.2. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

Use the information from the Array and String documentation to answer the following questions.

> :question: **Question**: What is printed by the following code?
>
> ```js
> let charles = ['coder', 'Tech', 47, 23, 350];
> charles.sort();
> console.log(charles);
> ```
>
> a. `[350, 23, 47, 'Tech', 'coder']`
> b. `['coder', 'Tech', 23, 47, 350]`
> c. `[23, 47, 350, 'coder', 'Tech']`
> d. `[23, 350, 47, 'Tech', 'coder']`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: d.

> :question: **Question**: Which statement converts the string `str = 'LaunchCode students rock!'` into the array `['LaunchCode', 'students', 'rock!']`?
> a. `str.join(" ");`
> b. `str.split(" ");`
> c. `str.join("");`
> d. `str.split("");`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: b.

> :question: **Question**: What is printed by the following program?
>
> ```js
> let groceryBag = ['bananas', 'apples', 'edamame', 'chips', 'cucumbers', 'milk', 'cheese'];
> let selectedItems = [];
> 
> selectedItems = groceryBag.slice(2, 5).sort();
> console.log(selectedItems);
> ```
>
> a. `['chips', 'cucumbers', 'edamame']`
> b. `['chips', 'cucumbers', 'edamame', 'milk']`
> c. `['cheese', 'chips', 'cucumbers']`
> d. `['cheese', 'chips', 'cucumbers', 'edamame']`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: a.

## 8.4. Multi-Dimensional Arrays

Earlier we learned that arrays can store any type of value. If that is true, can we store arrays inside of array? Yes!

A **multi-dimensional array** is an array of arrays, meaning that the values inside the array are also arrays. The *inner* arrays can store other values such as strings, numbers, or even other arrays.

This figure illustrates how it would look like.
$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{synonyms} & \rightarrow &
\begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|}
\hline
& 0 & 1 & 2 \\
\hline
0 & \text{"table"} & \text{"grid"} & \text{"spreadsheet"}\\
\hline
1 & \text{"determined"} & \text{"serious"} & \text{"strong"} \\
\hline
2 & \text{"potential"} & \text{"possible"} & \text{"likely"} \\
\hline
3 & \text{"enhance"} & \text{"improve"} & \text{"upgrade"} \\
\hline
\end{array}
\end{aligned}
$$

### 8.4.1. Two Dimension Arrays

The simplest form of a multi-dimensional array is a two dimensional array, or "matrix". A matrix is like a spreadsheet with rows and columns. To access items in a matrix, use square bracket notation and two indexes `array[row][column]`. The first index is for the outer array, or the "row". The second index is for the inner array, or "column".

> :information_source: **NOTE**: The row and column analogy is used to help visualize a two dimensional array, however it's not a perfect analogy. There are no specific JavaScript language rules forcing the inner arrays to all have the same length. The inner arrays are separate arrays that can be of different length.

> **Example**: Use a two dimensional array to contain three different lists of space shuttle crews.
>
> ```js
> let shuttleCrews = [
>    ['Robert Gibson', 'Mark Lee', 'Mae Jemison'],
>    ['Kent Rominger', 'Ellen Ochoa', 'Bernard Harris'],
>    ['Eilen Collins', 'Winston Scott',  'Catherin Coleman']
> ];
> 
> console.log(shuttleCrews[0][2]);	// Mae Jemison
> console.log(shuttleCrews[1][1]);	// Ellen Ochoa
> console.log(shuttleCrews[2][1]);	// Winston Scott
> ```

### 8.4.2. Multi-Dimensions and Array Methods

In a matrix, both inner and outer arrays can be altered with array methods. However, bracket notation must be used correctly.

To apply a method to the outer array, the syntax is:

```js
matrix.method();
```

To apply a method to one of the inner arrays, the syntax is:

```js
matrix[row].method();
```

> **Example**: Use array methods to add an addition crew array and alter existing arrays.
>
> ```js
> let shuttleCrews = [
>    ['Robert Gibson', 'Mark Lee', 'Mae Jemison'],
>    ['Kent Rominger', 'Ellen Ochoa', 'Bernard Harris'],
>    ['Eilen Collins', 'Winston Scott',  'Catherin Coleman']
> ];
> 
> let newCrew = ['Mark Polansky', 'Robert Curbeam', 'Joan Higginbotham'];
> 
> // Add a new crew array to the end of shuttleCrews
> shuttleCrews.push(newCrew);
> console.log(shuttleCrews[3][2]);
> 
> // Reverse the order of the crew at index 1
> shuttleCrews[1].reverse();
> console.log(shuttleCrews[1]);
> ```
>
> ```
> Joan Higginbotham
> [ 'Bernard Harris', 'Ellen Ochoa', 'Kent Rominger' ]
> ```

### 8.4.3. Beyond Two Dimensional Arrays

Generally, there is no limit to how many dimensions you can have when creating arrays. However, it is rare that you will use more than two dimensions. Later on in this class, we will leanr about more collection types that can handle complex problems beyond the scope of two dimensional arrays.

### 8.4.4. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: What are the two dimensional indexes for `"Jones"`?
>
> ```js
> let school = [
>    ["science", "computer", "art"],
>    ["Jones", "Willoughby", "Rhodes"]
> ];
> ```
>
> How would you add `"dance"` to the array at `school[0]`?
>
> How would you add `"Holmes"` to the array at `school[1]`?
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**:
>
> A.  `school[1][0]`
>
> B. `school[0].push("dance");`
>
> C. `school[1].push("Holmes");`

## 8.5. Exercises: Arrays :runner:

> :x: **CENSORED**

## 8.6. Studio: Strings and Arrays :studio_microphone:

> :x: **CENSORED**

### 8.6.1. Before You Start

### 8.6.2. String Modification

### 8.6.3. Array and String Conversion

### 8.6.4. Bonus Mission: Multi-dimensional Arrays :rocket:

:checkered_flag: Woo! Eight chapters done. **Up next: [Repeating With Loops](Loops.md)**

---

#LaunchCode

