# 15. Scope

[toc]

---

## 15.1. Introduction

Back in [Chapter 10](10.Functions%20%29Part%201%29###10.6.1.%20Function%20Scope), we saw that *where* variables are declared and initialized in the code affects where they can be used. This idea is called **scope**, and it is used to describe the ability of a program to acces or modify a variable.

> **Example**:
>
> ```js
> let a = 0;						// a is "global"
> 
> function coolFunction() {
>    let b = 2;					// b is "local"
>    return a + b;
> }
> ```
>
> `a` is accessible *inside* and *outside* of `coolFunction`. It has **global scope**.
>
> b is only accessible *inside* of `coolFunction`. It has **local scope**.

Let's add some `console.log` statements to explore this code snippet.

> **Example**:
>
> ```js
> let a = 0;
> console.log(a);
> 
> function coolFunction() {
>    let b = 2;
>    console.log(`a = ${a}, b = ${b}.`);
>    return a + b;
> }
> 
> a += 1;
> console.log(a);
> 
> coolFunction();
> console.log(b);
> ```
>
> ```
> 0
> 1
> a = 1, b = 2.
> ReferenceError: b is not defined
> ```

1. Lines 2 and 11 print the intial an incremented values of `a`.
2. Line 13 calls `coolFunction()`, and line 6 prints the values of `a` and `b`. This shows that both variables are accessible within the function.
3. Line 14 throws a `ReferenceError`, showing that `b` is not accessbile outside of `coolFunction`.

### 15.1.1. Block/Local Scope

==**Local scope** refers to variables declared and intialized inside a function or (code) block. A *locally* scoped variable can only be referenced inside of the block or function where it is defined.== In the example above, `b` has a local scope limited to `coolFunction()`. ==Referencing or attempting to update `b` outside of the function leads to a scoping error.==

> 🧩**Try It!** The following code has an error related to scope. Try to fix it! ([Link](https://repl.it/@launchcode/ScopeError))
>
> ```js
> function myFunction() {
>    let i = 10;
>    return 10 + i;
> }
> 
> console.log(i);
> ```

### 15.1.2. Global Scope

==**Global scope** refers to variables declared and initialized outside of a function and in the main body of the file. These variables are accessible to any function witin a file.== In the first example above, `a` has global scope.

Global scope is the default in JavaScript. If you assign a value to a variable WITHOUT declaring it with `let` or `const`, then the variable automatically becomes global.

> **Example**:
>
> ```js
> // Code here CAN use newVariable.
> 
> function coolFunction() {
>    newVariable = 5;
>    return newVariable;
> }
> 
> // Code here CAN use newVariable.
> ```

> :warning: **WARNING!** In a `for` loop, `for(i = 0; i < string.lenght; i++)` leaving out the `let` from `i = 0` means that `i` is treated as a global variable. ANY other portion of the program can access or modify `i`, which could disrupt how well the lopp operates.

### 15.1.3. Execution Context

**Execution context** refers to the conditions underwhich a variable is executed--its scope. Scoping affects the variable's behavior at runtime.. When the code is run in the browser, everything is run at a global context. As the complier processes the code and finds a function, it shifts into the function context before returning to global execution context.

Let's look at this code.

```js
let a = 0;

function coolFunction() {
   let b = 2;
   return a + b;
}

function coolerFunction() {
   let c = 5;
   c += coolFunction();
   return c;
}

console.log(coolFunction());
console.log(coolerFunction());
```

Now, let's consider the global execution context (GEC) for each step.

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: Insert some state diagrams or flow charts later.

1.  First, the GEC is entered as the compiler executes the code.
2. Once `coolFunction()` is hit, the compiler creates and executes `coolFunction()` under the `coolFunction()` execution context.
3. Upon completion, the compiler returns to the GEC.
4. The compiler stays at the GEC until the creation and execution of `coolerFunction()`.
5. Inside of `coolerFunction()` is a call to `coolFunction()`. The compiler will go up in the execution context to `coolFunction()` before returning down to `coolerFunction()`'s execution context. Upon completion of that function, the compiler returns to the GEC.

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: Here would be a good time to introduce currying later.

### 15.1.4. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

Both of the concept checks refere to the following code block:

```js
function myFunction(n) {
   let a = 100;
   return a + n;
}

let x = 0;

x = myFunction(x);
```

> :question: **Question**: What scope is variable `x`?
> a. Global
> b. Local
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: a. (`x` is *global*.)

> :question: **Question**: In what order with the compiler execute the code?
> :exclamation: **Answer**: 

## 15.2. Using Scope

==Scope allows programers to control the flow of information trhough variables in their programs.== Some variables you want to set up as constants (like $\pi$), which can be accessed globally. Others you want to keep secure to minimize the danger of accidental updates, like a variable holding someone's user name which should be kept secure.

### 15.2.1. Shadowing

==**Variable shadowing** is where two variables in different scopes have the same name. The variables can be accessed under different context. However, shadowing can affect the variable's accessibility. It can also cause confusion for anyone reviewing the code.==

> **Example**
>
> ```js
> const input = require('readline-sync');
> 
> function hello(name) {				// @param name
>    console.log('Hello,', name);		// @param name
>    name = 'Ruth';					// @param name
>    return doubleName(name);			// @param name
> }
> 
> function doubleName(name){			// @param name
>    console.log(name+name);			// @param name x2
>    return name+name;				// @param name x2
> }
> 
> let name = input.question("Please enter your name: ");	// global name
> 
> hello(name);		// global name
> doubleName(name);	// global name
> console.log(name);	// global name
> ```
>
> So what's the value of the name in lines 4, 10, 16, 17, and 18? If you are curious, why not 🧩**try it!** ([Link](https://repl.it/@launchcode/ShadowingExample))

==This example is a good reason why shadowing is NOT a best practice in coding.== For your conveinence, I added some comments to show which variable was being used. This likely won't be the case when you look at code else where. ==Whenever possible, use different global and local names.==

### 15.2.2. Variable Hoisting

==**Variable hoisting** is a behavior in JavaScript where variable declarations are raised to the top of the current scope. This results in a program being able to use a variable before it has been declared. Hoisting occurs when the `var` keyword is used in the declaration, but it does NOT occur when `let` and `const` are used in the declaration.==

> :information_source: **NOTE**: Although we do not use the `var` keyword in this course, you will see it used in a lot of other JavaScript resoruces. Variable hoisting is an important concept to keep in mid as you work with JavaScript.

### 15.2.3. Check Your Understaind :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: What keywords allow a variable to be hoisted?
>
> a. `let`
> b. `var`
> c. `const`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: b. ==`var` allows hoisting to occur, `let` and `const` do not.==

> :question: **Question**: Consider this code:
>
> ```js
> let a = 0;
> 
> function myFunction() {
>    let a = 10;
>    return a;
> }
> ```
>
> Because there are two separate variables with the name `a` under two different scopes, `a` is being shadowed.
> a. True
> b. False
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: a. TRUE. `a` was declared inside of `myFunction`, but the inner `a` will be used. 

:checkered_flag: Wasn't that good to have a nice short chapter. [Chapter 16](16.More%20on%20Types.md) is going to be even better.

---

#LaunchCode

