# 18. Classes

[toc]

---

## 18.1 What Are Classes

Recall that ==objects are and data structures  that hold many values which consist of *properties* and *methods*.==

We often need to create many objects of the same *type*. To do this in an efficient way, we define a **class**, which allows us to set up the general structure for an object. We can then reuse that structure to buil multiple objects. These objects all have the same set of *keys*, but will have various *values* assigned to each key.

### 18.1.1. An Astronaut Object

Let's revisit the animal astronauts from earlier exercises.

When we create an object to hold an astronaut's data, it might look something like:

```js
let fox = {
    name: 'Fox',
    age: 7,
    mass: 12,
    catchPhrase: function(repeats){
        let phrase = 'LaunchCode';
        for (let i = 0; i < repeats; i++){
            phrase += ' Rocks';
        }
        returns phrase;
    }
}

console.log(`${fox.name} is ${fox.age} years old and has a mass of ${fox.mass} kg.`);
console.log(`${fox.name} says, "${fox.catchPhrase(3)}."`);
```

```
Fox is 7 years old and has a mass of 12 kg.
Fox says, "LaunchCode Rocks Rocks Rocks."
```

The `fox` object contains all the data and functions for the astronaut named `'Fox'`.

Of course, we have multiple astronauts on our team. To store data for each one, we would need to copy the structure for `fox` multiple times and then change the values to suit each crew member. This is inefficient and repetitive.

By letting us define our ouw classes, JavaScript provides a better way to create multiple similar objects.

```mermaid
classDiagram
class Astronaut {
	String name
	Number age
	Number mass
	String catchPhrase()
}

class Astronaut0 {
	name: 'Fox'
	age: 7,
	mass: 12,
	catchPhrase: 'LC Rocks!'
}

class Astronaut1 {
	name: 'Tortoise'
	age: 120,
	mass: 227,
	catchPhrase: 'Code4Ever'
}

class Astronaut2 {
	name: 'Hippo'
	age: 25,
	mass: 1500,
	catchPhrase: 'No bugs!'
}

Astronaut ..> Astronaut0
Astronaut ..> Astronaut1
Astronaut ..> Astronaut2
```

## 18.2. Declaring and Calling a Class

### 18.2.1. Creating a Class

Just like the `function` keyword defines a new function, the **`class`** keyword defines a new class. By convention, a class name starts with a capital leader to distinguish them from JavaScript function and variable names. Class names are in *title case* (`MyClassName`) where as methods and properties are in camel case (`myFunctionName`).

Remember that ==classes are blueprints for building muiltiple objects of the same type.== The general forma for delcaring a class is:

```js
class ClassName {
    constructor(parameters){
        // assign properties
    }
    // define methods
}
```

Note the keyword **`constructor`**. This is a special method for creating objects of the same type, and it assigns the key-value pairs. Parameters are passed into `constructor` rather than the `class` declaration.

#### 18.2.1.1. Assigning Properties

Let's set up an `Astronaut` class to help us store data about our animal crew. Each animal has a `name`, `age`, and `mass`, and we assign these properties in the constructor as follows:

```js
class Astronaut {
    constructor(name, age, mass){
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.mass = mass;
    }
}
```

The **`this`** keyword defines a key-value pair, where the text attached to `this` becomes the key, and the value follows the equal sign (`this.key = value`).

`constructor` uses the three `this` statements (`this.name = name`, etc.) to achieve the same results as the object declaration `let objectName = {name: someName, age: someNumber, mass: someMass }`. Each time the `Astronaut` class is called, `constructor` builds an object with the same set of keys, but assigns different values to the keys based on the arguments.

> :information_source: **NOTE**: Each class requires ***one*** `constructor`. Including more than one `constructor` results in a syntax error. If `constructor` is left out of a class declaration, JavaScript adds an empty `constructor(){}` automatically.

### 18.2.2. Creating a New Class Object

To create an object from a class, we use the `new` keyword.

```js
let objectName = new ClassName(arguments);
```

`new` create an **instance** of a class, which means that the object generated shared the same set of keys as every other object made from the class. However, the values assigned to key may differ.

> **Example**: Let's create an object for two of our crew members: Fox and Hippo.
>
> ```js
> class Astronaut {
>     constructor(name, age, mass){
>         this.name = name;
>         this.age = age;
>         this.mass = mass;
>     }
> }
> 
> let fox = new Astronaut('Fox',7,12);
> let hippo = new Astronaut('Hippo',25,1500);
> 
> console.log(typeof hippo, typeof fox);	// "object object"
> 
> console.log(hippo,fox);
> ```
>
> ```
> object object
> Astronaut { name: 'Hippo', age: 25, mass: 1500 }
> Astronaut { name: 'Fox', age: 7, mass: 12 }
> ```

In lines 9 and 10, we call the `Astronaut` class twice and pass in different sets of arguments, creating the `fox` and `hippo` objects.

The output of line 14 shows that `fox` and `hippo` are bot the same *type* of object (`Astronaut`). The two share the same *keys*, but they have different values assigned to those keys.

> **Note**: Two object created from the same class are NOT equal, even if the keys within the objects have the same values. We discussed this previously back in Chapter 12. :reminder_ribbon:

After creating an `Astronaut` object, we can access, modify, or add new key-value pairs as described in Chapter 12.

> **Try it**: Play around with modifying and adding properties inside and outside of the `class` declaration. [repl.it](https://repl.it/@launchcode/classExamples01)
>
> ```js
> class Astronaut {
>    constructor(name, age, mass){
>       this.name = name;
>       this.age = age;
>       this.mass = mass;
>    }
> }
> 
> let fox = new Astronaut('Fox', 7, 12);
> 
> console.log(fox);
> console.log(fox.age, fox.color);
> 
> fox.age = 9;
> fox.color = 'red';
> 
> console.log(fox);
> console.log(fox.age, fox.color);
> ```
>
> ```
> Astronaut { name: 'Fox', age: 7, mass: 12 }
> 7 undefined
> Astronaut { name: 'Fox', age: 9, mass: 12, color: 'red' }
> 9 'red'
> ```

Attempting to print `fox.color` in line 12 returns `undefined`, since that property is not included in the `Astronaut` class. Line 15 adds the `color` property to the `fox` object, but this change will not affect any other objects created with `Astronaut`.

#### 18.2.2.1. Setting Default Values

What happens if we create a new `Astronaut` without passing in all of the required arguments?

>  **Try it!** [repl.it](https://repl.it/@launchcode/classExamples02)
>
> ```js
> class Astronaut {
>    constructor(name, age, mass){
>       this.name = name;
>       this.age = age;
>       this.mass = mass;
>    }
> }
> 
> let tortoise = new Astronaut('Speedy', 120);
> 
> console.log(tortoise.name, tortoise.age, tortoise.mass);
> ```
>
> ```
> Speedy 120 undefined
> ```

To avoid issues with missing arguments, we can set a *default* value for a parameter as follows:

```js
class Astronaut {
   constructor(name, age, mass = 54){
      this.name = name;
      this.age = age;
      this.mass = mass;
   }
}
```

Now if we call `Astronaut` but do not specify a mass value, the constructor automatically assigns a value of 54. If an argument is included for `mass`, then the default value is ignored.

### 18.2.3. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

The questions below refer to a class called `Car`.

```js
class Car {
   constructor(make, model, year, color, mpg){
      this.make = make;
      this.model = model;
      this.year = year;
      this.color = color;
      this.mpg = mpg;
   }
}
```

> :question: **Question**: If we call the class with `let myCar = new Car('Chevy', 'Astro', 1985, 'gray', 20)`, what is the output by `console.log(typeof myCar.year)`?
>
> a. `object`
> b. `string`
> c. `function`
> d. `number`
> e. `property`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: d.

> :question: **Question**: If we call the class with `let myCar = new Car('Tesla', 'Model S', 2019)`, what is output by `console.log(myCar)`?
>
> a. `Car {make: 'Tesla', model: 'Model S', year: 2019, color: undefined, mpg: undefined }`
> b. `Car {make: 'Tesla', model: 'Model S', year: 2019, color: '', mpg: '' }`
> c. `Car {make: 'Tesla', model: 'Model S', year: 2019 }`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: a.

## 18.3. Assigning Class Methods

:bookmark: Pick up here later!

### 18.3.1. Assigning Methods Outside `constructor`

### 18.3.2. Assigning Methods Inside `constructor`

### 18.3.3. Which Way Is Preferred?

### 18.3.4. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 18.4. Inheritance

### 18.4.1. `extends`

### 18.4.2. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 18.5. Exercises: Classes :runner:

## 18.6. Studio: Classes :studio_microphone:

### 18.6.1. Before You Start

### 18.6.2. Getting Started

### 18.6.3. Part 1 -- Add Class Properties

### 18.6.4. Part 2 -- Add First Class Method

### 18.6.5. Part 3 -- Add More Methods

#### 18.6.5.1. Calculating the Test Average

#### 18.6.5.2. Determining Candidate Status

### 18.6.6. Part 4 -- Play a Bit



---

#LaunchCode

