# 20. We Built the Internet on HTML

[toc]

---

> :information_source: **NOTE**: Check out my HTML Guide (coming soon)

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: :black_flag: Work on this chapter later! (I know that I may know HTML very well, but I own you this and the next chaper but I got to catch up on stuff.)

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: Is there something in mermaid we can use to emulate an Entity-Relationship diagram (ERD)? This might be useful in describing the relationship between HTML Elements and Attributes.

## 20.1. Background

### 20.1.1. What is HTML?

### 20.1.2. HTML Elements

### 20.1.3. HTML Tags

### 20.1.4. HTML Writing Style

### 20.1.5. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: What does HTML stand for?
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: Hypertext Markup Language
>
> (I didn't include the multiple choices this time because all the wrong answers were awful! It's easier to know this way for this question.)

## 20.2. HTML Structure

### 20.2.1. Structure Rules

### 20.2.2. Document Head

### 20.2.3. Document Body

### 20.2.4. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: Which HTML tag does nto require a closing tag?
>
> a. `title`
> b. `body`
> c. `head`
> d. `DOCTYPE`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: d. 

## 20.3. HTML Tags

### 20.3.1. Tags to Know

### 20.3.2. Tag Example

### 20.3.3. Attributes

### 20.3.4. Attributes Example

### 20.3.5. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

> :question: **Question**: Which tag is used to make text italicized?
>
> a. `b`
> b. `i`
> c. `em`
> d. `br`
>
> :exclamation: **Answer**: b. and c.

## 20.4. Exercises: HTML :runner:

## 20.5. Studio: Making Headlines :studio_microphone:

### 20.5.1. Getting Ready: Developer Tools :hammer_and_wrench:

### 20.5.2. Studio

#### 20.5.2.1. Image URLs

### 20.5.3. Resources :books:

:checkered_flag: We just took care of the skeleton. Let's take care of the skin! **[CSS](21.CSS.md) is next!**

---

#LaunchCode