# 27. TypeScript

[toc]

---

> :information_source: **NOTE**: If this works out, a TypeScript Guide may ensue.

## 27.1. Why TypeScript?

The final chapters of the first unit cover a framework called [**Angular**](https://angular.io/). Angular runs on [**TypeScript**](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) for a couple of reasons.

First, TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript. That means you can write JavaScript code and use it in TypeScript files.

Second, TypeScript is a **statically typed language**, that is a language where the type of a varaible is given at the time the program is compiled. This is often achieved by adding the type of the variable to the variable declaration. However, that is no what we have been doing so far. JavaScript is a **dynamically typed language**, a language where the type of the variable is determined at runtime and is based on the value inside the variable, not the variable declaration.

Statically typed languages are considered to be more stable and less prone to production errors, because the error will occur in development.

### 27.1.1. Set Up Your Local Development Environment

As we continue to shift away from online work in repl.it (which is a P.I.T.A. to use in the first place) to *local* development on your computer, you need to install some specific software.

1. If you haven't done so already: Download and install [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) on your computer.
2. Install [Node](http://nodejs.org/) on your computer, which also installs the [NPM](http://npmjs.com/) <abbr title="Command Line Interface">CLI</abbr>. We discussed this briefly bac in the [Modules](13.Modules.md) chapter.

> **REMINDER**: If you are using Windows, [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/) is the easiest way to install these things. I should have instructions in these notes for doing all this anyway! ( :reminder_ribbon:**TODO**: Insert the link to that page later. ​ )

The NPM CLI tool provides you with an efficient and deliberate way to install other software and modules onto your computer. As you proceed through the next four chapters, you will use the NPM CLI in the terminal to perform these installations.

## 27.2. Declaring and Using Variables

Since TypeScript is statically typed, the type of the value is added to the variabl declaration. However we will still use or `let` and `const` keywords where appropriate.

The general format of a variable declaration is:

```typescript
let variableName : type = value;
```

### 27.2.1. `number`

```typescript
let variableName : number = 10;
```

### 27.2.2. `string`

```typescript
let variableName : string = "10";
```

### 27.2.3. `boolean`

```typescript
let variableName : boolean = true;
```

### 27.2.4. Examples

In TypeScript we write:

```typescript
let spaceShuttleName : string = "Determination";
let shuttleSpeed : number = 17500;
let distanceToMars : number = 225000000;
let distanceToMoon : number = 384400;
let milesPerKilometer : number = 0.621;
```

which compiles into JavaScript as

```javascript
let spaceShuttleName = "Determination";
let shuttleSpeed = 17500;
let distanceToMars = 225000000;
let distanceToMoon = 384400;
let milesPerKilometer = 0.621;
```

### 27.2.5. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 27.3. Arrays in TypeScript

Arrays in TypeScript must contain values of the same type. When declaring an array, the type needs to be declared.

```typescript
let arrayName : number[] = [10,9,8];
```

What if the array needs to hold values of different types?

Nowe we need a **tuple**. A tuple is a special structure in TypeScript that can hold as many values needed of different types.

```typescript
let tupleName: [number, string, number];

tupleName = [10,"9",8];
```

### 27.3.1. Examples

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: Write this section later.

### 27.3.2. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 27.4. Functions in TypeScript

When creating functions in TypeScript, we have many of the same options as in JavaScript. We can make anonymous functions, giving them a different number of parameters, etc. However, when working with functions in TypeScript, we have to kee *data type* in mind.

### 27.4.1. Declaring Function

#### 27.4.1.1. Named Functions

Let's take a look at a TypeScript function delaration.

> **Example**: We want to declare a function called `myFunction` with one parameter, a number called `x`. `myFunction` returns the value of `x` multipled by 2.
>
> With this is mind, the declaration in TypeScript would look like:
>
> ```typescript
> function myFunction(x : number) : number {
>     return x * 2;
> }
> ```
>
> Here you can see that we provided the type of the paramter and the type of the value returned after the colons. If `x` were a string or boolean, then we would replace `number` with the data type of `x`.

What if the function doesn't return a value? In these cases, we use **`void`** as the return type.

> **Example**: Let's change up `myFunction` a little bit. `myFunction` still has one parameter, our number called `x`, however it doesn't return a specific value.
>
> ```typescript
> let y : number = 0;
> 
> function myFunction(x : number) : void {
>     y = x * 2;
> }
> ```
>
> Instead of returning the value of `x` multiplied by 2, `myFunction` now assigns the value of `x` multipled by 2 to another variable `y`. We can now use `void` to specify that no value is returned.

#### 27.4.1.2. Anonymous Functions

For an anonymous function, you still need to privide types for the value returned and the parameters.

> **Example**: Nowe we want to declare an anonymous function `myFunction`, which has one parameter, a number called `x` and returns the value of `x` multipled by 2.
>
> ```typescript
> let myFunction = function(x : number) : number { return x * 2; };
> ```

Just as we did above with the named function, we need to make sure that we include the data type for the parameters and the return type of the function.

> :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: What about arrow functions?

### 27.4.2. Optional Parameter

In JavaScrit, you can declare a function with 5 parameters and only give it 2 when it comes times to use it. In TypeScript, that is not the case. In TypeScript, when you declare a function with 5 parameters, you have to give the function 5 arguments when calling it, unless you make some of the parameters optional. This means that when you are calling the function, can leave off the optional parameter(s).

To denote a parameter as optional, you can use **question mark** (`?`) notation. Any parameters that are optional must follow the required parameters.

> **Example**:
>
> ```typescript
> function myFunction(a: number, b?: number): number {
>     return a+b+5;
> }
> 
> console.log(myFunction(1,2));	// 8
> console.log(myFunction(1));		// 6
> console.log(myFunction(3,5));	// 13
> console.log(myFunction(3));		// 8
> ```

In this example, the `myFunction` function has two parameters, `a` and `b`. `a` is required and `b` is optional. When only one argument is provided to the function, then the value of `a+5` is returned. When both arguments are provided, then the sum of the 2 arguments and 4 is returned.

Another way to deal with a parameter you need to be optional is to give a default value.

Let's say that in the example above, we wanted to give `b` a default value of 5. That way, if no argument is supplied for `b`, then the value returned is that of `a+10`.

> **Example**: 
>
> ```typescript
> function myFunction(a: number, b = 5): number {
>     return a+b+5;
> }
> 
> console.log(myFunction(1,2));	// 8
> console.log(myFunction(1));		// 11
> console.log(myFunction(3,5));	// 14
> console.log(myFunction(3));		// 13
> ```
>
> > :reminder_ribbon: **TODO**: Should `b` have a type before `= 5`?

Because `b` has a default value of `5`, when the user does not pass a value to the second argument of `myFunction`, 5 is used as the value of `b`.

### 27.4.3. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 27.5. Classes and Interfaces in TypeScript

### 27.5.1. Classes

Classes in TypeScript look something like this:

```typescript
class Astronaut {
   name: string;
   constructor(firstName: string, lastName: string) {
      this.name = firstName + " " + lastName;
   }
   greet() {
      return "Hello, " + this.name;
   }
}

let Bob = new Astronaut("Bob","Smith");
```

You may remember the `this` and `new` keywords from working with classes in JavaScript. Earlier in the chapter, we also noted that when declaring variables in TypeScript, we have to specify the type of value. The same applies to function parameters, as you can see in the constructor.

When [using inheritance](18.Classes.md), classes in Typescript can also use the `extends` keyword to denote child and parent classes, as shown here:

```typescript
class Panthera {
   roar: string;
   constructor(currentRoar: string) {
      this.roar = currentRoar;
   }
}

class Tiger extends Panthera {
   stripes: boolean = true;

}

let tigger = new Tiger("loud");
console.log(tigger.roar);
console.log(tigger.stripes);
```

### 27.5.2. Interfaces

Interfaces are not used in JavaScript but are important in TypeScript. Like classes, **interfaces** define properties and methods that a type will have. The difference is that interfaces do NOT include initialization of properties or implementations of methods.

> **NOTE**: Though the use of interfaces in Angular is not within the scope of this book, interfaces are used rather frequently in Angular code and are important in object-oriented programming languages, such as Java.

We may create an interface for a data type that contains all of the information we need about an astronaut and then used that information in a function.

```typescript
interface Astronaut {
   name: string;
}

function astronautName (astronaut: Astronaut) {
   name: string;
   return astronaut.name;
}

let bob = {name: "Bob"};
console.log(astronautName(bob));
```

Interfaces define the contract that other classes or objects must comply with if implementing that interface. Multiple classes can implement one face, and that flexibility allows different classes to share one type. This can be helpful when a function parameter needs to make use of certain behaviors.

```typescript
interface interfaceName {
   someProperty: number;
}

class className implements interfaceName {
   constructor(x: number) {
      this.someProperty = x;
   }
}
```

> **Example**:
>
> ```typescript
> interface Panthera {
>    roar: string;
> }
> 
> class Tiger implements Panthera {
>    roar: string;
> 
>    constructor() {
>       this.roar = 'rooooaaaarrrr';
>    }
> }
> 
> class Lion implements Panthera {
>    roar: string;
> 
>    constructor() {
>       this.roar = 'ROOOOAAAAARRRRRR';
>    }
> }
> 
> function pantheraSounds(panthera: Panthera) {
>    console.log(`Panthera says ${panthera.roar}`);
> }
> 
> let tiger = new Tiger();
> let lion = new Lion();
> 
> pantheraSounds(tiger);
> pantheraSounds(lion);
> ```
>
> In this example, the `Panthera` interface defines the `roar` property. `Tiger` and `Lion` implement the `Panthera` interface, which means `Tiger` and `Lion` must have a `roar` property.
>
> The function `pantheraSounds` has one property of type `Panthera`. The variables `tiger` and `lion` can be passed into `pantheraSounds` because they are instance of classes that implement the `Panthera` interface.

#### 27.5.2.1. Optional Parameters

`null` and `undefined` are primative data types in TypeScript, however, they are treated differently by TypeScript. If you are planning on using `null` to define a property of an interface that is not known yet, use the TypeScript optional parameter, `?`.

Here's how it would look in TypeScript.

In JavaScript, we might have an object that looks like this:

```js
let giraffeTwo = {
     species: "Reticulated Giraffe",
     name: "Alicia",
     weight: null,
     age: 10,
     diet: "leaves"
};
```

If we wanted to declare the same object as an interface in TypeScript, we would have to use the optional parameter for the weight property.

```typescript
interface giraffeTwo = {
     species: string;
     name: string;
     weight?: number;
     age: number;
     diet: string;
};
```

### 27.5.3. `export`

In TypeScript, you can use the `export` keyword to make classes and interfaces available for import in other files. This will look familiar to you as you saw something similar with modules.

Here's how it is typically used

```typescript
export class className {
	// properties
	// methods
}
```

### 27.5.4. `import`

In TypeScript, you can use the `import` keyword to use classes and interfaces declared in other files available for use in the file you are working on. This is a similar idea to importing modules, however, the syntax is different in TypeScript.

```typescript
import { className } from 'relativeFilePath';

let newClass = new className;
```



### 27.5.5. Check Your Understanding :white_check_mark:

## 27.6. Compiling TypeScript

To work with TypeScript in our Node environment, we'll need to install the TypeScript module. We talked about running JavaScript in Node. Unlike JavaScript, TypeScript can't be run directly in Node. TypeScript files must be **compiled** (translated) into JavaScript.

In this section, you will install the compiler and then practice compiling and running a small TypeScript program from the terminal.

==To install TypeScript, type==

```bash
$ npm install -g typescript
```

> :apple:/ :penguin:  **Mac/Linux users**: You may receive a permission error when running this install command, add `sudo` to the beginning of the command.

Once you have TypeScript installed, you'll be able to run

```bash
$ tsc -v
```

**`tsc`** is the **TypeScript compiler**. The `-v` flag will show us the version of TypeScript that we have installed.

### 27.6.1. `hello_world.ts`

In true tutorial fashion, let's write a quick `Hello, World` program so we can see the compiler in action.

In you code editor, create a new file called **`hello_world.ts`**. In it, initialize a variable called `message` with a string value `Hello, World`, then print the message.

> **NOTE**: Since this is a short program, why not use a simple text edtor like `nano` or `vim`?

```typescript
/* @file hello_world.ts */
let message : string = 'Hello, World';
console.log(message);
```

In the terminal, navigate to the directory that your `hello_world.ts` file is in and compile the code.

```bash
$ ls
hello_world.ts
$ tsc hello_world.ts
$ ls
hello_world.js hello_world.ts
$ node hello_world.js
Hello, World
```

If your TypeScript file is free of syntax errors, you won't see a respnse from the terminal directly. However, you should see that you hve a newly generated file in you working directory called `hello_world.js`.

If it compiles correctly, you should be able to run the `hello_world.js` file in `node` and see the classic `Hello, World` string.

> **NOTE**: If you update you TypeScript file, you must re-compile it so that the changes are applied to the corresponding JavaScript file.

You'll need these compiling and executing steps for the exercises in the following section, so refer back here as needed.

## 27.7. Exercise: TypeScript :runner:

### 27.7.1. Part 0 - Get the Starter Code

### 27.7.2. Part 1 - Declare Variables With Type

### 27.7.3. Part 2 - Print Days to Mars

### 27.7.4. Part 3 - Create a Function

### 27.7.5. Part 4 - Create a `Spacecraft` Class

### 27.7.6. Part 5 - Export and Import the `SpaceLocation` Class

### 27.7.7. Sanity Check

## 27.8. Studio: TypeScript :studio_microphone:

### 27.8.1. Starter Code

### 27.8.2. Requirements

### 27.8.3. Classes

### 27.8.4. Simulation in `index.ts`

### 27.8.5. Compile and Run `index.ts`

### 27.8.6. Submitting Your Work

---

#LaunchCode